sql-statements: add doc of lock tables and unlock tables (#12818)
pingcap/docs: sql-statements/sql-statement-lock-tables-and-unlock-tables.md

---
title: LOCK TABLES and UNLOCK TABLES
summary: An overview of the usage of LOCK TABLES and UNLOCK TABLES for the TiDB database.
---

# LOCK TABLES and UNLOCK TABLES

> **Warning:**
>
> `LOCK TABLES` and `UNLOCK TABLES` are experimental features for the current version. It is not recommended to use it in the production environment.

TiDB enables client sessions to acquire table locks for the purpose of cooperating with other sessions for access to tables, or to prevent other sessions from modifying tables. A session can acquire or release locks only for itself. One session cannot acquire locks for another session or release locks held by another session.

> `LOCK TABLES` acquires table locks for the current client session. Table locks can be acquired for common tables on the condition that you have the `LOCK TABLES` and `SELECT` privilege for each object to be locked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LOCK TABLES` acquires table locks for the current client session. If you have the `LOCK TABLES` and `SELECT` privilege for each object to be locked, you can acquire table locks for common tables .
```

> `UNLOCK TABLES` explicitly releases any table locks held by the current session. `LOCK TABLES` implicitly releases any table locks held by the current session before acquiring new locks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`UNLOCK TABLES` explicitly releases any table locks held by the current session. `LOCK TABLES` implicitly releases all table locks held by the current session before acquiring new locks.
```

> A table lock protects only against inappropriate reads or writes by other sessions. A session holding a `WRITE` lock can perform table-level operations such as `DROP TABLE` or `TRUNCATE TABLE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A table lock protects against reads or writes by other sessions. A session that holds a `WRITE` lock can perform table-level operations such as `DROP TABLE` or `TRUNCATE TABLE`.
```

> **Warning：**
>
> To enable table locks, you need to set [`enable-table-lock`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-table-lock-new-in-v400) to `true` in the configuration files of all TiDB instances.

## Synopsis

```ebnf+diagram
LockTablesDef

>          ::= 'LOCK' 'TABLES' TableName LockType ( ',' TableName LockType)*

Author: ```suggestion
         ::= 'LOCK' ( 'TABLES' | 'TABLE' ) TableName LockType ( ',' TableName LockType)*
```

UnlockTablesDef
         ::= 'UNLOCK' 'TABLES'

LockType
         ::= 'READ' ('LOCAL')?
           | 'WRITE' ('LOCAL')?
```

## Table lock acquisition

You can acquire table locks within the current session by using the `LOCK TABLES` statement. The following lock types are available:

`READ` lock:

- The session that holds this lock can read the table, but not write it.
- Multiple sessions can acquire a `READ` lock for the table at the same time.
- Other sessions can read the table without explicitly acquiring a `READ` lock.

The `READ LOCAL` lock is only for syntax compatibility with MySQL and is not supported.

`WRITE` lock:

- The session that holds this lock can read and write the table.
- Only the session that holds this lock can access the table. No other session can access it until the lock is released.

`WRITE LOCAL` lock:

- The session that holds this lock can read and write the table.
- Only the session that holds this lock can access the table. Other sessions can read the table, but not write it.

> If the `LOCK TABLES` statement must wait due to locks held by other sessions on any of the tables, an error is returned upon the execution of this statement, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the lock that the `LOCK TABLES` statement needs is held by another session, the `LOCK TABLES` statement must wait, and an error is returned upon the execution of this statement, for example:
```

```sql

> > lock table t1 read;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> LOCK TABLE t1 READ;
```

ERROR 8020 (HY000): Table 't1' was locked in WRITE by server: f4799bcb-cad7-4285-8a6d-23d3555173f1_session: 2199023255959
```

The preceding error message indicates that the session with ID `2199023255959` in TiDB `f4799bcb-cad7-4285-8a6d-23d3555173f1` already holds a `WRITE` lock on table `t1`. Therefore, the current session cannot acquire a `READ` lock on table `t1`.

You cannot acquire the same table lock multiple times in a single `LOCK TABLES` statement.

```sql

> > LOCK TABLE t WRITE, t READ;

Author: ```suggestion
> LOCK TABLES t WRITE, t READ;
```

ERROR 1066 (42000): Not unique table/alias: 't'
```

## Table lock release

> When the table locks held by a session are released, they are all released at the same time. A session can release its locks explicitly, or locks may be released implicitly under certain conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the table locks held by a session are released, they are all released at the same time. A session can release its locks explicitly or implicitly.
```

- A session can release its locks explicitly with `UNLOCK TABLES`.

> - If a session issues a `LOCK TABLES` statement to acquire a lock while already holding locks, its existing locks are released implicitly before the new locks are granted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a session issues a `LOCK TABLES` statement to acquire a lock while already holding locks, its existing locks are released implicitly before the new locks are acquired.
```

> If the connection for a client session terminates, whether normally or abnormally, TiDB implicitly releases all table locks held by the session. If the client reconnects, the locks are no longer in effect. For this reason, it is not recommended to enable auto-reconnect on the client. With auto-reconnect enabled, the client is not notified if reconnect occurs but any table locks or current transaction are lost. With auto-reconnect disabled, if the connection drops, an error occurs for the next statement issued. The client can detect the error and take appropriate action such as reacquiring the locks or redoing the transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the connection for a client session terminates, whether normally or abnormally, TiDB implicitly releases all table locks held by the session. If the client reconnects, the locks are no longer in effect. For this reason, it is not recommended to enable auto-reconnection on the client. If you enable auto-reconnection, the client is not notified when reconnection occurs, and all table locks or current transactions are lost. By contrast, with auto-reconnection disabled, if the connection drops, an error occurs when the next statement is issued. The client can detect the error and take appropriate action such as reacquiring the locks or redoing the transaction.
```

## Table-locking restrictions and conditions

> You can safely use `KILL` to terminate a session that is waiting for a table lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can safely use `KILL` to terminate a session that holds a table lock.
```

> You cannot acquire table locks on tables in the `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`, `PERFORMANCE_SCHEMA`, `METRICS_SCHEMA`, and `mysql` databases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot acquire table locks on tables in the following databases:

- `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`
- `PERFORMANCE_SCHEMA`
- `METRICS_SCHEMA` 
- `mysql`
```

## MySQL compatibility

### Table lock acquisition

> - In TiDB, if session A has already held a table lock, an error is returned if session B attempts to write to the table. In MySQL, the write request of session B is blocked until session A releases the table lock. Table locking requests from other sessions are blocked until the current session releases the `WRITE` lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In TiDB, if session A has already held a table lock, an error is returned if session B attempts to write to the table. In MySQL, the write request of session B is blocked until session A releases the table lock. Requests for locking the table from other sessions are blocked until the current session releases the `WRITE` lock.
```

---
title: LOCK TABLES and UNLOCK TABLES
summary: An overview of the usage of LOCK TABLES and UNLOCK TABLES for the TiDB database.
---

# LOCK TABLES and UNLOCK TABLES

> **Warning:**
>
> `LOCK TABLES` and `UNLOCK TABLES` are experimental features for the current version. It is not recommended to use it in the production environment.

TiDB enables client sessions to acquire table locks for the purpose of cooperating with other sessions for access to tables, or to prevent other sessions from modifying tables. A session can acquire or release locks only for itself. One session cannot acquire locks for another session or release locks held by another session.

> `LOCK TABLES` acquires table locks for the current client session. If you have the `LOCK TABLES` and `SELECT` privilege for each object to be locked, you can acquire table locks for common tables .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LOCK TABLES` acquires table locks for the current client session. If you have the `LOCK TABLES` and `SELECT` privilege for each object to be locked, you can acquire table locks for common tables.
```

`UNLOCK TABLES` explicitly releases any table locks held by the current session. `LOCK TABLES` implicitly releases all table locks held by the current session before acquiring new locks.

A table lock protects against reads or writes by other sessions. A session that holds a `WRITE` lock can perform table-level operations such as `DROP TABLE` or `TRUNCATE TABLE`.

> **Warning：**
>
> To enable table locks, you need to set [`enable-table-lock`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-table-lock-new-in-v400) to `true` in the configuration files of all TiDB instances.

## Synopsis

```ebnf+diagram
LockTablesDef
         ::= 'LOCK' ( 'TABLES' | 'TABLE' ) TableName LockType ( ',' TableName LockType)*

UnlockTablesDef
         ::= 'UNLOCK' 'TABLES'

LockType
         ::= 'READ' ('LOCAL')?
           | 'WRITE' ('LOCAL')?
```

## Acquire table locks

You can acquire table locks within the current session by using the `LOCK TABLES` statement. The following lock types are available:

`READ` lock:

> - The session that holds this lock can read the table, but not write it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The session that holds this lock can read the table, but cannot write it.
```

- Multiple sessions can acquire a `READ` lock from the same table at the same time.
- Other sessions can read the table without explicitly acquiring a `READ` lock.

The `READ LOCAL` lock is only for syntax compatibility with MySQL and is not supported.

`WRITE` lock:

- The session that holds this lock can read and write the table.

> - Only the session that holds this lock can access the table. No other session can access it until the lock is released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only the session that holds this lock can access the table. No other sessions can access it until the lock is released.
```

`WRITE LOCAL` lock:

- The session that holds this lock can read and write the table.

> - Only the session that holds this lock can access the table. Other sessions can read the table, but not write it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only the session that holds this lock can access the table. Other sessions can read the table, but cannot write it.
```

If the lock that the `LOCK TABLES` statement needs is held by another session, the `LOCK TABLES` statement must wait, and an error is returned upon the execution of this statement, for example:

```sql

> > LOCK TABLE t1 READ;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> LOCK TABLES t1 READ;
```

- If a session issues a `LOCK TABLES` statement to acquire a lock while already holding locks, its existing locks are released implicitly before the new locks are acquired.

If the connection for a client session terminates, whether normally or abnormally, TiDB implicitly releases all table locks held by the session. If the client reconnects, the locks are no longer in effect. For this reason, it is not recommended to enable auto-reconnection on the client. If you enable auto-reconnection, the client is not notified when reconnection occurs, and all table locks or current transactions are lost. By contrast, with auto-reconnection disabled, if the connection drops, an error occurs when the next statement is issued. The client can detect the error and take appropriate action such as reacquiring the locks or redoing the transaction.

## Table-locking restrictions and conditions

You can safely use `KILL` to terminate a session that holds a table lock.

You cannot acquire table locks on tables in the following databases:

- `INFORMATION_SCHEMA`
- `PERFORMANCE_SCHEMA`
- `METRICS_SCHEMA`
- `mysql`

## MySQL compatibility

### Table lock acquisition

> - In TiDB, if session A has already held a table lock, an error is returned if session B attempts to write to the table. In MySQL, the write request of session B is blocked until session A releases the table lock. Requests for locking the table from other sessions are blocked until the current session releases the `WRITE` lock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In TiDB, if session A has already held a table lock, an error is returned if session B attempts to write to the table. In MySQL, the write request of session B is blocked until session A releases the table lock, and requests for locking the table from other sessions are blocked until the current session releases the `WRITE` lock.
```
